Lately, I’ve been working on a huge feature that’s coming to [luminance] soon. While working on
it, I’ve been facing several design problems I think are interesting to talk about.

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [The context](#the-context)
* [The problem](#the-problem)
* [Faking higher-kinded types](#faking-higher-kinded-types)
  * [A simple implementor](#a-simple-implementor)
  * [Polymorphic use](#polymorphic-use)
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Conclusion](#conclusion)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# The context

Imagine you want to expose a trait that defines an interface. People know about the interface and
can use provided types to switch the implementation. That’s a typical use case of traits.

```rust
// This trait is pub so that users can see and use it
pub trait System {
  type Err;

  fn do_something(&mut self) -> Result<(), Self::Err>;
}
```

You can have a type `SimpleSystem` that implements `System` and that will do something special in
`do_something`, as well as a type `ComplexSystem` doing something completely different.

Now imagine that your `System` trait needs to expose a function that returns an object that must be
typed. What it means is that such an object’s type is tagged with another type. Imagine a
type `Event` that is typed with the type of event it represents:

```rust
pub struct Event<T> {
  code: i64,
  msg: String,
  // …
}
```

That type must be provided and implemented by systems, not by the actual interface code. How would
we do this?

Furthermore, we might want another trait to restrict what `T` can be, but it’s off topic for our
current problem here.

# The problem

Let’s try a naive implementation first:

```rust
pub trait System {
  type Event;

  type Err;

  fn do_something(&mut self) -> Result<(), Self::Err>;

  fn emit_event(&mut self, event: Self::Event);
}
```

That implementation allows `SimpleSystem` to implement `Event` as a single type and then
implement `emit_event`, taking its `Event` type. However, that event is not typed as we
wanted to. We want `Event<T>`, not `Event`.

However, Rust doesn’t authorize that per-se. The following is currently illegal in Rust:

```rust
pub trait System {
  type Event<T>;

  // …

  fn emit_event<T>(&mut self, event: Self::Event<T>);
}
```

> [RFC 1598] is ongoing and will allow that, but until then, we need to come up with a solution.

The problem is that associated types, in Rust, are completely monomorphized when the `trait` impl
is monomorphized, which is, for instance, not the case for trait’s functions. `emit_event` will
not have its `F` type variable substituted when the implementor is monomorphized — it will be sank
to a type when it’s called. So what do we really want to express with our `Event<T>` type?

```rust
pub trait System<EventType> {
  type Event;

  fn emit_event(&mut self, event: Self::Event);
}
```

That would work but that’s not _exactly_ the same thing as our previous trait. The rest of the
trait doesn’t really depend on `EventType`, so we would duplicate code every time we want to support
a new type of event. Meh.

# Faking higher-kinded types

`Event<T>` is a higher-kinded type (HKT). `Event`, here, is what we call a _type constructor_ — as
opposed to _data constuctor_, like associated `new` functions. `Event` takes a type and returns a
type, in the type-system world.

As I said earlier, Rust doesn’t have such a construct yet. However, we can emulate it with a nice
hack I came across while trying to simulate kinds.

See, when a HKT has its type(s) variable(s) substituted, it becomes a regular, monomorphized type. A
`Vec<T>`, when considered as `Vec<u32>`, is just a simple type the same way `u32` is one. The key is
to decompose our trait into two distinct yet entangled interfaces:

- One that will work with the monomorphized version _after_ the trait is monomorphized.
- One that will introduce polymorphism via a method, and not an associated type.

The first trait is implemented on systems and means “[a type] knows how to handle an event of a
given type.” The second trait is implemented on systems, too, and means “can handle all events.”

```rust
pub trait SystemEvent<T>: System {
  type Event;

  fn emit_system_event(&mut self, event: Self::Event) -> Result<(), Self::Err>;
}

pub trait System {
  type Err;

  fn do_something(&mut self) -> Result<(), Self::Err>;

  fn emit_event<T>(
    &mut self,
    event: <Self as SystemEvent<T>>::Event
  ) -> Result<(), Self::Err>
  where Self: SystemEvent<T> {
    <Self as SystemEvent<T>>::emit_system_event(self, event)
  }
}
```

The idea is that the `SystemEvent<T>` trait must be implemented by a system to be able to emit
events of type `T` inside the system itself. Because the `Event` type is associated in
`SystemEvent<T>`, it is the monomorphized version of the polymorphic type in the actual
implementation of the trait, and is provided by the implementation.

Then, `System::emit_event` can now have a `T` type variable representing that `Event<T>` we
wanted. We use a special type-system candy of Rust here: `Self: Trait`, which allows us to state
that in order to use that `emit_event<T>` function, the implementor of `System` must also
satisfy `SystemEvent<T>`. Even better: because we already have the implementation of
`emit_system_event`, we can blanket-implement `emit_event<T>`!

Several important things to notice here:

- First, a system _can_ now implement several traits:
  - `System`, to work as a system, obviously.
  - `SystemEvent<T>`, to handle events of type `T`. The actual type is defined by the system itself.
- Second, a system doesn’t have to implement `SystemEvent<T>` if it doesn’t know how to handle
  events of type `T`. That opt-in property is interesting for us as it allows systems to implement
  only what they support without having to make our design bleed to all systems. _Neat_.
- The usage of `Self: Trait` allows to introduce a form of polymorphism that is not available without
  it.
- Because we can blanket-implement `emit_event`, the implementor of `System` doesn’t even have to
  implement `emit_event`.
- `SystemEvent<T>` has `System` has super-trait to share its `Err` type.

The last point is the _hack key_. Without `Self: Trait`, it would be way harder or more convoluted
to achieve the same result.

## A simple implementor

Let’s see a simple implementor that will just print out the event it gets and does nothing in
`do_something`.

```rust
struct Simple;

#[derive(Debug)]
struct ForwardEvent<T>(pub T);

impl System for Simple {
  type Err = ();

  fn do_something(&mut self) -> Result<(), Self::Err> {
    Ok(())
  }
}

impl<T> SystemEvent<T> for Simple where T: std::fmt::Debug {
  type Event = ForwardEvent<T>;

  fn emit_system_event(&mut self, event: Self::Event) -> Result<(), Self::Err> {
    println!("emit: {:?}", event.0);
    Ok(())
  }
}
```

As you can see, it’s really simple and straight-forward. We can select which events we want to be
able to handle: in our case, anything that implements `Debug`.

Let’s use it:

```rust
fn main() {
  let mut system = Simple;
  system.emit_event(ForwardEvent("Hello, world!"));
  system.emit_event(ForwardEvent(123));
}
```

## Polymorphic use

The idea is that, given a type `S: System`, we might want to emit some events without knowing the
implementation. To make things even more crunchy, let’s say we want the error type to be a
`()`.

Again, it’s quite simple to do:

```rust
// we need this to forward the event from the outer world into the system so that we don’t have to
// know the actual type of event used by the implementation
impl<T> From<T> for ForwardEvent<T> {
  fn from(t: T) -> Self {
    ForwardEvent(t)
  }
}

fn emit_specific_event<S, E>(
  system: &mut S,
  event: E
) -> Result<(), S::Err>
where
  S: System<Err = ()> + SystemEvent<E>,
  S::Event: From<E>,
{
  system.emit_event(event.into())
}

fn main() {
  let mut system = Simple;
  system.emit_event(ForwardEvent("Hello, world!"));
  emit_specific_event(&mut system, "Hello, world!");
}
```

We could event change the signature of `System::emit_event` to add that `From<E>` constraint to
make the first call easier, but I’ll leave you with that. The important aspect of this code snippet
is the fact that the implementor will handle a type of event `Event<T>` while the interface uses
`T` directly. We have injected a HKT `Event`.

# Rationale

Why do I care about such a design? It might seem complex and hard, but it’s actually a very useful
use of a typeclass / trait type system — especially in [luminance], where I use type-system
concepts **a lot**; after all, it’s based on its Haskell version! If you compare my solution to the
next-to-come HKT proposal from [RFC 1598], we have:

- [RFC 1598] will bring the syntax `type Event<T>;` as associated types, which will allow to remove
  our `SystemEvent<T>` trait.
- With that RFC, the type will have to be _total_. What it means is that the `T` here is the same
  for all implementors: an implementor cannot restrict `T`, it must be implemented for all of them.
  If you want to restrict the type of events your type can receive, if I understand the RFC
  correctly, you’re handcuffed. That RFC will authorize the _author of the trait_ to restrict your
  `T`, not the _author of the implementor_. That might have some very useful advantages, too.
- With my solution, the _author of the trait_ can still restrict `T` by applying constraints on
  `emit_event`.

# Conclusion

In the quest of emulating HKT, I’ve found myself with a _type-system toy_ I like using a lot:
_equality constraints_ and self-constraints (I don’t know how those `Self: Trait` should be named).
In Haskell, since we don’t implement a typeclass _for a type_ but we provide _an instance for a
typeclass_, things are slightly different. Haskell doesn’t have a `Self` type alias, since a
typeclasses can be implemented with several types variables (i.e. with the `MultiParamTypeClasses`
and `FlexibleInstances` GHC extensions), only _equality constraints_ are needed.

In the end, Rust continues to prove that even though it’s a systems programming language, I can
express lots of powerful abstractions I miss (_a lot_) from Haskell with _a bit more_ noise. I think
the tradeoff is worth it.

I still haven’t completely made up my mind about GAT / [RFC 1598] (for sure I’m among the ones who
want it on stable ASAP but I’m yet to figure out _exactly_ how it’s going to change my codebases).

As always, have fun, don’t drink and drive, use condoms, keep the vibes and don’t use impl Trait in
argument position. Have fun!

[luminance]: https://crates.io/crates/luminance
[RFC 1598]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1598
