# Big brother of NSA

On the 19th of March 2015, a law was introduced in France. That law was
entitled *“loi du renseignement”* and was presented in regard of what happened
in the *Charlie Hebdo* awful week. The main idea of the law is to put peole on
wire so that terrorist activities could be spotted and dismantled.

That law will be voted and apply on the the 5th of May 2015.

Although such a law sounds great for counter-terrorism, it has several major
issues people should be aware of.

## You’re on wire

Every people – in France and abroad as well of course – could be on wire. The French
government might have access to whatever you do with your internet connection.
Crypto-analysts working for the goverment will read dozens of thousands of
messages from individuals. They’ll know where you go to and where you go from –
think of your smartphone’s GPS capabilities. They’ll know which pictures you
take, how much time you spend in your bathroom. They’ll even be able to read
your e-mails if they want to.

Of course, most people “just don’t care”. *“Why should I care that the
government knows the litter brand I bought to my cat? I don’t give a damned
heck as long as they catch bad people*”. That’s a point, but that’s also being
blind. Digital communication is not only about yourself. It’s about people.
It’s about you and your friends. You, and your contacts. You can’t choose for
them whether they’d like people to watch over their shoulders every now and
then. If the government has access to your private data, it has access to your
friends’ and contacts’ data as well. Not giving a damned heck is being selfish.

## You’ll be violated

Then comes the issue with what the law is. It gives the government the right
to spy on masses. They could even sell the data they collect. As a counter
argument, the “Commission de contrôle des techniques de renseignement” – which
French stands for “Control commission of intelligence techniques” – was
created. That committe is there to watch the government and ensure it doesn’t
go out of control and doesn’t violate people’s rights. The issue with that is
that our prime minister has the right to ignore the committee’s decision. If
the committee says *“Wait a minute. You don’t have the right to gather those
information without asking for M. Dupont’s approval”*, the prime minister may
answer back *“Well, fuck off. I will and you can’t stop me”*. And the sad truth
is that… yeah, with that law, the prime minister and their team has the right
to ignore the committee’s decision.

The committee then has no point. It just gives an **opinion**. Not a veto. What
would happen if a terrorist hacked into your computer. Would you go to jail
because the prime minister would have stated you were a terrorist? Damn me if I
know.

# We’re going to lose a right

French people will lose a very important right: the right to privacy. It’ll be
sacrificied without your opinion for counter-terrorism, giving the government
a power it shouldn’t have. You thought the NSA was/is wrong? Sure it is. But
when the NSA watches over American and worldwide people, it is illegal whereas
when the French government watches over French and worldwide people, it is
legal. That makes the French government way worse than the NSA to me.

I think the first thing I’ll do will be to revoke my French VPS subscription
to move it out of France, in a country in which people still have privacy. Keep
your communication encrypted as much as possible (ssh and so on). And as a bad
joke, don’t leave your camera in your bedroom. You might be spied on by Manuel
Valls while having sex with your girlfriend.
